%!TEX root = main.tex
\chapter{Introduction} % (fold)
\label{cha:introduction}

% Significance (Contribution of the study)
Unbiased information about animal population ecology gives biologists vital
information about the effects of different physical or biological factors on the
distribution and abundance of animal species, which plays a key role in the
development of effective conservation strategies for rare and endangered
species. One typical approach that biologists take to estimate the size of a
population of a given species is physically marking the animals.  This approach
is not only invasive for the animals, but also expensive both in terms of time
and cost.

The ability to identify an individual animal by recognizing it in photographs
provides a non-invasive alternative that allows researchers to monitor the
species' diversity and dispersal.  Researchers can track movements and observe
the genetic variation of a species by comparing each member's images with the
all the existing images collected at different times and locations. However, the
arduous task of comparing over a thousand images of every individual animal and
their potential matches makes manual reviews impractical for large collections.
To alleviate the problem, we need to automate the recognition process using
computer-based image recognition techniques.

The need for individual animal identification systems for large biological image
databases led to the emergence of \emph{Sloop}, the first pattern retrieval
engine for animal biometrics that couples computational visual recognition with
crowd-sourcing~\cite{sloop13,sloop14,sloop15}. As a content-based information
retrieval system, Sloop provides a way to efficiently search and analyze pairs
of images, sorted by their similarity, from within large collections. This can
speed up the identification procedure by an order of magnitude since not all the
pairs need to be manually reviewed.

% Statement of the problem (problem must be reflected to the title)
Starting with a collection of unannotated images, Sloop automatedly compares
individuals animals in the images to determine preliminary matches. Despite the
scalability and advantages of computational speed, the accuracy outputted from
automatic recognition have yet to achieve human-level performance.  Thus, Sloop
then posts a number of selected images pairs on an online crowd-sourcing
platform to gather human feedback required to finalize the decision.

% CNN Conceptual framework 
The foremost requirements of a biometric-based system like Sloop are
\emph{correctness} and \emph{scalability}. It is obvious that correctness is the
most desired property of an identification system. However, the image
recognition itself is a challenging problem in the field of computer vision that
continues to attract growing number of researchers over the last few decades.
The considerable progress we have seen in computer vision is largely due to
local descriptor-based algorithms, such as SIFT~\cite{lowe04}, and
SURF~\cite{surf08}, etc.  For the purpose of animal image biometrics, this
thesis will deal mostly with the image classification and recognition problems.

Motivated by the achievements of deep learning, we implement a new image
processing workflow that uses a convolutional neural network,
AlexNet~\cite{kriz12}, as a feature extractor. This technique is
referred to as \emph{transfer learning}~\cite{transfer, finetune}. In the last
few years, deep convolutional neural networks~\cite{lecun95, kriz12} have
outperformed SIFT and other descriptor-based techniques by a large margin in
both object recognition and classification tasks~\cite{kriz12, fisher14,
ILSVRC15}. In fact, the architecture has demonstrated recognition accuracy
comparable to humans in several visual recognition tasks, such as recognizing
faces~\cite{deepface14} and handwritten digits~\cite{mnist13}.

% Relevant Feedback Conceptual framework
Despite the stellar performance of these algorithms in the past decades, there
exists a substantial gap between algorithmic and human-level performance. Some
degree of \emph{human involvement} may benefit the identification process. Not
only can user input resolve the errors, the retrieval system can also
incrementally learn from the accumulation of user-input data. This creates a
positive feedback loop where the model learns its mistakes from the previous
iterations and re-evaluates its strategy based on the gold standard responses
from a human given at the previous iteration.

This leads us to the problem of how we can maximize the quality of completed
tasks at a low prices or subject to budget constraints. Sloop leverages
crowd-sourced relevance feedback to improve the retrieval accuracy. As a
requester, our utility is the ratio between the amount of \emph{information
gain} from completed work and the \emph{price} that we have to pay for the work.
Hence, we need to design a mechanism which makes repeated decisions to maximize
our utility.

In this thesis, we present two improvements to \emph{Sloop}~\cite{sloop15}:
\emph{convolutional neural network integration} and \emph{relevance feedback
optimization}. High accuracy recognition algorithms together with effective
relevance feedback strategies has shown to yield substantial gains in retrieval
performance, and, therefore, narrow the performance gap between the
machine-based algorithms and humans.

The first part of this thesis presents \emph{Sloop Amazon Mechanical Turk (Sloop
MTurk)}~\ref{cha:sloop_mturk}, the crowdsourced relevance feedback engine for
Sloop, along with the analyses on the effectiveness of relevance feedback and
various sampling strategies for relevance feedback.  Then, we presents
\emph{SlooPy Image Processing Engine (SlooPy IPE)}~\ref{cha:sloopy_ipe}, the new
image recognition architecture with CNN feature extractor workflow, whose goal
is to improve the base recognition accuracy and mitigate the cost incurred by
human involvement.  In this part, we also compare the recognition performance of
SlooPy IPE to that of the previous architecture, which is based on SIFT.

% chapter introduction (end)